Where were we? Oh, the trees. And I said, well, I
think it's $50 million, but I'll check on it. And I
came back with a precise figure of the Forest
Service right upstairs. And he said, I thought of
all those millions of trees that we plant through
the 4-H and FFA and commercially. He said, then I
had just signed the... authorization to buy the,
oh, I think it was 300 live oaks that were placed
around the perimeter where we thought we were
going to lose the big oaks, the dying of the
live oak decline. And he said, here's the letter I
proposed. Dear brother so-and-so, we plant more
than we cut. And I think it's only fair to know that
the enclosed letter was written by someone, and
they signed your name at the bottom. Sincerely,
Jack K. Williams.
Here are some little things that I took notes on
about him. On being president, I have had from
friends notes of commiseration on my promotion,
various expressions written and verbal which
range in emotional scale from condolences to
abject pity. He said, this job should be filled by a
friendless orphan, a bachelor, one skilled in
tightrope walking and bronco busting. And then on
another occasion, the atmosphere of education is
heady with the smell of change for some, perfume
for others, brimstone. on campus riots, what
would happen, Dr. Williams, if we had a riot?
Police and strength will be called without
hesitation. Those identified as leaders of
felonious conduct and as inciters of a riot will be
moved off campus, and the injunctive process will
be applied to prevent their reentry. On former
students, he counted among A&M's assets the
legion of former students where fierce loyalty to
this university is no less material than it is
vocal. This being a formal way of saying that Aggie
alumni put their dollars where their mouths are.
And here are just some notes about him. He was a
strong supporter of the Corps and that very few
people knew of his experiences in the Marines and
the Pacific Theater during the war. And he had a
very positive attitude about the military. Had a
marvelous influence on bringing new faculty of
eminence and obtaining the funding to keep them.
And he had the very innovative idea of using
students in presentations at budget hearings.
And that really was a step forward for us. Had a
strong impact on grants and gifts from industry
and endowed professorships. some of the
significant accomplishments under him, the Sea
Grant designation, and I had bringing Frank
Wardlaw to plan and develop the A&M Press. His pet
peeve was federal intervention in higher
education, probes, reports, investigations,
audits, surveys, visitation, and he referred to
all of that as the web of entanglement. His
personality, I mentioned they marched on the
president's home when he came in and the resulting
$5,000 grant from the Strait Foundation. You
remember they came in and they marched on his home
and welcomed him and that really struck him. He was
warmly down to earth. One time holding and handing
up fluorescent bulbs to a man on the ladder at his
home. He told me one time, he said, Cooper, your
hair is getting too long. He says, I'm going to If
you let it get any longer, I'm going to hold you by
the shoulders and let Dooley Bell cut your hair
with his clippers. He loved to visit with elderly
folks, and he milked them for their wisdom. One of
the times he fussed at me, we decided to have
student leaders at his house and at my house for
meals. And he himself mixed up hamburger meat with
onions and mustard and made hamburgers for the
kids. And I had funding from the alumni where I
could do things like that and let Randy Matson pay
for it. So when they came to my house the next month,
I had little sirloin strip steaks. And he was mad.
And he came up to me and says, Cooper, he said, they
come to the president's home and get hamburgers,
and they come to his assistant's home and get
sirloin strips. I says, how's this going to look?
had a note he can be temperamental I mentioned the
admissions incident and I mentioned the
University of Hill comment about the two Board of
Regents he took me to Fort Riley Kansas with him to
inspect the summer ROTC camp big contingency of
Aggies there and they they used
dozens and dozens of airplanes to shuttle us from
the airport to Fort Riley. And he was greatly
opposed to smoking, especially in confined
areas. It really bothered him. So we got in this
plane, and he and I, they had taken the luggage
compartment out of the back end of this little
plane, and he and I were squeezed in that luggage
space. The pilot was a hot shot, and he started
smoking immediately. It was one of those hot days
with convection currents just knocking the
little old plane. It was sickening. And I could
tell that he was getting uptight. And finally, he
said to the pilot, yelling over four or five other
men, Can't you get this thing up a little bit
higher, get a little more altitude on it? He said,
we're really getting bounced around back here.
And this pilot looked back. He says, hell, man. He
said, we're so far overloaded. He says, it's a
wonder we're up this high. And he looked at me, and
he said, Edwin talked to the colonel. He says, when
this is over, we're going to drive back in a staff
car. We're not getting back on the plane. And I told
you about planning more than we cut. And someone
sent me this hate letter. and thought you should
know that they signed your name to it. Those were
some impressions that I had of him. And then this
little talk was about both Rutter and Williams and
what I said to the old group. As you and I reflect
back on things as we knew them in old Army days,
there have been some changes which we might
personally regret. But the broad thrust these
last 30 years has indeed been forward. And as one
writer said, upon what we remember, nothing is
more responsible for the good old days than a bad
memory.
And so those were the things that I brought to that
Sol Ross group. As
far as you know, what were the factors that caused
frustration between him and the board? What did
they disagree about?
He wasn't that open about he would let you know that
there had been a terrible argument about
something. But it was real hard to get out of him
what the argument was about. He had another policy
after he was so gifted at speaking. I'd say, well,
somebody prominent like, say, Polly Krueger has
called and wants to know if he can have a copy of that
speech that you made at the San Antonio Club. And he
said, tell Mr. Krueger that I lost it. He would
never give anybody a copy of his speeches. Like I
asked him a few times for some of those anecdotes,
like the brick. And after he was no longer here,
Nelda gave me a copy, but not while he was here. I
know that some of what they fussed about had
to do with personnel approvals. And I can't even
give you an example of someone that he either
thought should have a job or should not in a high
position that the board I do know that he
had a difficult time understanding what their
position was in regards to enrollment growth. I
know that there were difficulties about such
things as well. Housing is such a terrible
problem. Should the university add more housing,
or should we not compete with a the free economy,
whether or not to build more dormitories. That was
a dispute.
There was, I know, some talk about what admission
requirements would be. I know that Mr.
Weisenbaker, for example, always felt that we
should just let her go, and that most of the wealthy
people like him were C students anyway, and so how
could we hold them back? And I remember I was
invited when I was dean of admissions, and I know it
had to be in the Williams era. Yeah, I know it did. To
bring them a report on a Sunday afternoon at one of
their meetings on enrollment projections And I
was led to believe possible ways to control
enrollment. And I had a whole battery of ideas on
that subject. I had a slide show all made up and
appeared before them. And before I even started my
presentation,
one of the board members asked about how admission
changes requirements would affect enrollment.
And that was the last word that I spoke that day. And
I went home terribly frustrated because I worried
over getting a nice presentation together and
didn't say one damn thing. Not only that, when I got
home, I decided to mix up a good strong bourbon and
soda and walk out in the backyard and stare at my
tomatoes. One of my grandsons had gotten a
bad-bitten racket and leveled the entire crop.
And there were my tomatoes all over the yard. And
the regents wouldn't listen to me. So it was
frustrating. But those are the kinds of things
that would upset him. And I
think even basic philosophies about the
direction the university should be moving and the
kind of faculty that we should be pursuing. Just
nearly everything that came up, they would have
somebody on that board. And Mrs. Williams, the
hardness that we have experienced in talking with
her since he died, I think she is convinced, was
convinced, that they were just trying to run him
off and it killed him. What do you think his goals
were for A&M? I think that he wanted more quality
and less quantity. And when you talk about
students, then you're talking about facilities,
too. And you're talking about faculty, too. And I
know that the medical school, he hoped for a law
school. He wanted us a little broader. The medical
school, I know for sure, was a pet hope. I feel less
about the law school in terms of what his hopes were
than I did the medical.
Did he have, as far as you know, any particular
strong supporters on the board? and or strong
opponents?
None come to mind either way.
But I got the definite
feeling that he would have given most anything not
to have to go to their meetings, because somebody
there would upset him every time. In a light moment
one day, He said something about playing golf the
afternoon the board meeting ended. And I said,
sir, I have heard you say that you're not a very good
golfer, but you seem to play golf every afternoon
when the board has just left. Well, I don't
understand. And he said, when I put that golf ball
on that tee, I then have the image there is a certain
regent's
posterior there, and when I tee off, I can release a
little bit of energy. The key people that he relied
upon, Dr. Byers retired as the chief academic
officer, and you were already over there. How did
he come to identify John Calhoun as the vice
president of academic affairs?
I
don't know. Because it was a personal search.
There wasn't a committee or anything like that. I
was not privy to any discussion on that subject. He
asked me. But I know he had.
With all contacts I had with him, he had the highest
regards for him and for you. For Winerdi, I heard a
conversation one time that John evidently said,
you know what, Winerdi is suggesting that we do on
this topic or whatever, and I remember Dr.
Williams' response was, well, turn him loose and
let him fly, or something like that. But he had a lot
of confidence in that team that was over there. And
then he was the one that selected John Colas. Which
was a tremendous. Oh, my. Yeah. And I don't know how
that happened. He did not consult with or ask
advice from me on things like that. He had his own.
Now, you have to understand. You have to think that
a lot of his contacts in the job that he had in Austin
would put him in touch with both academic and
student services types of people. In Austin, he
didn't have the close friendship with the kinds of
friendships that Mr. Rutter had, but he had been
the first commissioner of higher education in the
coordinating board. describe William's method
of operation with Austin realities legislature
and coordinating board
like let's make believe it's a budget hearing day
well he
he could defend I think better than anyone I ever
saw his request for increases in a given area and
was just phenomenal at explaining why that
particular school should be moving in that
direction as related to its mission, which was
written out better than anybody ever saw. And then
he used
student presentations there and always made sure
those were good, sharp people. But he knew the
legislative process, and he knew how to. He had his
own sources on how someone would act at a given
time. I used to go to the coordinating board
meetings. And frankly, I was appalled at a great
deal of the ignorance I saw displayed at those
meetings. And one was a fuss between the old man
with a cigar from Plainview and Mr. Weir that we
were talking about the other night in Carpus. And
they were fussing about, arguing about whether we
needed to approve a medical school at Texas Tech or
a law school somewhere else, not the A&M Law
School. And finally, the old man from from level
land and says, well, which do you think is more
important, a doctor or a lawyer? He says, it
depends on whether I'm in a hospital or in jail. I
remember that one. I remember that one. But that he
could work with. Let's see what that is.
Let me turn this on.
The fact is that dealing with the appointed
members of the coordinating board, he could fly
circles around those people pretty well.
I think make them feel real ignorant if they didn't
do what he thought was right. I remember a couple of
budget hearings when, with a straight face, he
would introduce the students that he'd brought as
students that he just happened to encounter as he
was leaving the campus. He knew nothing about
them. They were just typical A&M students, just
average run of the mill. And of course, all the
legislators would roll their eyes. They knew it
was coming on. But what do you think were, you
mentioned his greatest accomplishments. do you
remember any anecdotes, events, frustrations of
good humor and or where something went wrong and or
of where something went? Yes. One that comes to
mind is that as his assistant, as I did with Rudder
before him at graduation ceremonies, I would
present him with a bound soft leather book that had
every movement, every word that was to be spoken at
commencement and commissioning exercises. And I
was up on the stage as a commencement got underway.
And he came to me and whispered and said, do you have
a? spare copy of that book you prepared for me for
today's program? I said, are you talking about the
commencement program? I said, you don't have your
book?
And he said, well, I went back to the men's room a
while ago and I'd put it up on that, he said, you know
that tile thing there above the urinals? And I
said, yeah, I know what it is. He said, I put it up
there and went back into the letterman's lounge
and missed it and I went back in there and that
thing's gone. I said, I can tell you this, that any
other commencement from here on, I will have a
spare copy of that, but I don't now. He said, don't
worry about it. And Haskell, he went through that
program. I think maybe he did better without it
than he would have with it, including the
introductions. Now that's how smooth he was. He
was as skillful before an audience as anybody I've
ever known in any capacity. A
mother's club was just putty in his hands and poor
old General Boatner who was the commandant. Oh
what terrible times we had between the
commandant's office and the mother's clubs at one
time over a number of issues and he was here then and
Then he went to Koji Prison and broke up the riots
over there. And somebody was talking to him
afterwards about how difficult that was. He says,
that was nothing compared to facing an Aggie
mother's club. Koji Prison. Excuse me. I
deviated. No. Dr. Williams and his skills. I also
have the impression that in terms of World War II
service record, accomplishments and so forth
were quite comparable to those of Mr. Rudder but
almost no one knew it that's true and he didn't
really want to talk about it and he didn't and I
don't know that I have ever talked to anyone who
ever saw him pull out his medals pull out his
uniform or anything I think he thought it was a
necessary evil something that he just had to do his
best at while he was there and uh But he would never
talk about, you know, if you just mentioned a name
to Rutter that sounded like a name that he could
recall and he would open up and that was over. And
certainly not in Mr. Rutter's case, you're not
inferring and I'm not either, that he was a
braggart. No. That Rutter was a braggart. It was
just this was part of his life. What was the typical
daily routine? Compare a typical daily routine in
the Rutter family office years and the Williams
office years.
Rudder would get to
the office early, and he would have three or four
things that he'd laid awake at night worrying
about. And he would come in and tell whoever was at
the phone system there to call so-and-so and dean
so-and-so in that order. And he would get that off
of his mind. He'd get somebody working on
alternatives to a given problem that was
bothering him at that time. Then he would go into
the ladies would come in and have two to three feet
deep of papers for him to sign. And people were
always saying, why don't you delegate that? He
said, I want to know where every penny is going. And
if I delegate it, I'll lose track and we'll all get
in trouble. So he refused to sign off
administrative things like that. He expected his
staff to organize the incoming mail in order of
priority. And if it was really urgent, we'd show it
to him immediately. If it was a routine urgency, we
would draft a response for it. And most of the time
he'd sign it, but he would nearly always put a
little note at the bottom so they would know that he
knew exactly what was in there and it wasn't just a
machine sign-on.
He was one of the best off-the-cuff speakers we
ever had. I'm talking about Rutter. But if you'd
give him a written speech, which he insisted on, he
was the world's worst. He could not follow a
written... speech. But he would get up at
the luncheon before commencement and call the
name of every person in the room and their spouse
and introduce them to each other. Remarkable
memory about people. As I told you earlier, I would
usually go in every morning while he was signing
papers and bring up subjects and I would quickly
try to read his mood and if he was in one of those
staring far away looks you just may as well not
bring up any topic of controversial nature or
something that required serious thought because
you were not going to get him off of what was on his
mind.
He would nearly always want to have a big lunch with
somebody somewhere. and talk about some business
matter. You're saying almost every day? Yeah.
He could not rest. He would come right back. He put
in a full day and
time meant nothing to him because that was the
operations of the school. It was all that he really
cared about. Exclusive of family, of course. But
to get in a plane and go to Lubbock and speak to the
A&M Club in Lubbock was no big deal. That's just
part of a day. And then try to find some friends to
relax with and tell war stories late at night.
Williams
was more private about his feelings. When did the
Williams Day begin?
Williams would spend an hour or two working in his
office at home. Early, early. Early, early.
That's what I understood. And he really wouldn't
show until around 9 or 9.30. Because at first I
thought, oh boy, that must be nice to not have to
come. I didn't realize he'd been working on mail
for two and a half hours. He was very different
about mail And speech writing, I quickly learned
that was a waste of my time because he didn't depend
on anyone for his speech material. He just did it
himself and very often wouldn't even have notes.
But he would have a lot of the routine business done
on mail and what have you before he ever got the
office to spring tapes.
He
was more conservative about he was harder to get to
see as, let's say, a faculty member or a student or
what have you, harder to get to see than Mr. Rutter
was. He would turn down lots of invitations for
people to come in and see him and say, well, let
so-and-so do that. He told me early in the game.
that my primary responsibility for him in this job
was to be an ombudsman
between his office and the student body. And
that's really what he wanted me to do. He said a
similar thing to me with the faculty. OK. So he had
the two bases there covered. And he said, there's
no need, he said, You know these guys better than I
do, or can get to know them better than I do. You have
more time to do it. I said, that's what I want you to
do. I want you to help them understand why we're
doing things where we are. Answer all the
questions that you possibly can. If you need to ask
me, that's fine. But do the best you can to keep
close to them and let them know they have a friend in
this office. And on that line of thought, about
that time we had people like Roger Miller, Kent
Caperton, John Sharp, Gary Morrow, Chad Edwards.
We had quite a few people that we knew. Talking
about what he wanted me to do now, I said, Dr.
Williams, I know that some of our student leaders,
that we will be able to identify some of them
through this work that you have us doing, that are
really going to be important. either in politics
or business or education, I said, why don't we set
up a program here where once,
where when one graduates that we know is really
going to be sharpie, that we create a position
called, I didn't come right out of that, staff
assistant. whereby we take that person and let him
or her work in this office reporting to your
assistant on special projects related to student
affairs. And then, when they do go into their life
profession, they'll know what it's all about.